And we are moving to the next question, a very important question of our lecture, the question of managing turnover.
If we have been talking about what is turnover capital of an enterprise,
that is, we have defined it, indicating its importance for an enterprise,
now comes the moment of how to manage this capital, how to manage it correctly,
not to let it go to the dumps, so that the enterprise feels very good.
And now we come to the second, but the most important question of our lecture.
The practice says that it is possible to choose three types of various policies of managing turnover capital.
Aggressive, conservative and moderate centrist policy.
Aggressive policy.
An enterprise that has an aggressive policy of managing its capital is called a fat cat.
Why? What is aggressive policy?
Aggressive policy implies no restrictions in the growth of current assets.
No! Current assets are growing, increasing, the enterprise feels amazing.
The company has huge reserves, it never has a failure, it has no problems with deliveries,
it has all the reserves, any reserves.
Fat cat.
The other side of the coin.
Some of the reserves are dead, superfluous.
Taking all the risks into account, the enterprise freezes a huge amount of its assets in reserves.
Naturally, the economic profitability of these assets is lower.
But the enterprise has no problems.
As they say, if it doesn't hurt, the head will go.
No problems with failures in the production, supply or implementation process.
Aggressive policy of managing capital is typical of passive policy.
A sign of this policy is a significant pre-emphasis in the passive short-term loan.
The enterprise takes only short-term loans, uses them actively and returns them quickly.
If short-term loans prevail among all passives, it means that the enterprise is taking aggressive policy.
What does it give to the enterprise? Why does the enterprise use aggressive policy?
A short-term loan has its pros and cons.
The short-term loan has a lower interest rate.
A short-term loan in a bank can be charged at a lower rate than a long-term loan.
The second advantage of short-term loans is that there are forms of loans
that can be obtained for a period of a month without a deposit.
But this form of loan has its cons.
A short-term loan must be returned very quickly.
Therefore, only a short-term loan can be used by an enterprise
that quickly returns its profits to the enterprise.
Only for such enterprises with a short cycle, such a policy of managing capital is possible.
If an enterprise has a longer production cycle, it cannot use this policy.
If an enterprise takes a short-term loan and invests it in the production process,
it has no means to return it.
At the same time, the use of such a policy gives the enterprise an additional higher level of financial leverage.
Note that if the enterprise has a low interest rate, its profitability is high.
If the interest rate is lower than the profitability, the enterprise has a higher level of financial leverage
and can earn a higher margin.
Such a policy is chosen by large enterprises, which have a lot of money.
And most importantly, such a policy is chosen by enterprises that cannot be allowed to fail.
They cannot lose their partners, they cannot stop production.
But imagine a metallurgical plant.
What does it mean to have a shortage of supplies and, as a result, to stop the Martenovskaya furnace?
Domina furnace.
If you stop the domina furnace, a goat is formed there,
which is very difficult to extract, it is a waste of time, money, and so on.
There is a production that cannot be stopped under any circumstances.
There should be a surplus of supplies, it should be insured in all cases.
Here is the policy of a fat cat.
There is a diametrically opposite policy of asset management.
Conservative policy.
Conservative policy is diametrically opposite in the sense that it is used only by enterprises that have very little turnover.
So little that they tremble for every penny.
And they are forced to spend their money only on the most necessary assets.
They calculate up to every penny, they spend it very rationally.
Yes, because of this, they have a very high profitability of assets.
They have a very rational use of money.
But the opposite side, because they have very few assets, they can have a break.
Therefore, conservative policy can be used only by the poor, when there is simply not enough money and every penny is on the account.
Or with a high degree of business.
If you have clearly specified the needs in the supply and production, and the uncertainty is reduced to zero or its minimum value,
then the amount of supplies can be reduced to the minimum value.
Because you know exactly when and how much you need, and this is determined by the course of the production process.
Therefore, in these two cases, conservative policy is used.
A sign of conservative policy is a low interest rate of short-term loans in the total amount of passives.
That is, you pay very little to the bank, you take a loan.
While the sign of the policy of a fat cat, aggressive policy, is a high interest rate of short-term loans.
In conservative policy, all assets are financed by permanent passives.
Own money, long-term loans and loans.
Because short-term loans are used very little.
And, accordingly, the effect of the financial lever is quite low.
And the third group of businessmen, enterprises that use policy, is moderate policy or centrists.
They do not belong to the fat cats or do not work poorly.
They do not have excess assets or are not in a state when there are no funds at all.
They are within the moderate middle.
Probably, this is an optimal size that avoids shortcomings inherent in the extreme.
But at the same time, it does not give the advantages that these extremes have.
Those who pursue centrist policy, their risk of unpaid ability is at a certain average size.
So acceptable, convenient to them.
No one makes any claims to them.
But at the same time, they do not have excess money, thanks to which these risks can be reduced to zero.
A sign of moderate centrist policy is the lack or very low rate of short-term loans in the total amount of passives.
Only long-term loans prevail there.
There are practically no short-term loans.
If we combine all the signs listed in one single table, we will get a matrix of the choice of policy, operative management of current assets and passives.
Please look at the slide that is now in front of you.
You see the matrix in which the policy of management of current assets and the policy of management of current passives are combined.
There are three types of management that we have just discussed.
Aggressive, moderate and conservative.
The intersection of these types of management gives us the financial policy that is applied at the enterprise.
From this slide you can see that aggressive policy in relation to passives is not combined with conservative policy in relation to assets.
It is impossible, there is no such enterprise that could use these two policies.
The aggressive policy of assets, of fat cats, is not combined with conservative policy of passives.
All other combinations are possible.
Combination of two aggressive policies gives an aggressive state of the enterprise on the market.
The enterprise uses only short-term loans and with the help of these loans it buys huge amounts of reserves.
It has no problems.
This is aggressive policy.
On the contrary, the conservative policy is applied on both sides of the asset and the passive.
The enterprise saves every penny and looks at their expenses very scrupulously.
At the same time it does not use short-term loans, but only long-term loans.
This is the conservative policy of assets and passives.
All other combinations give us moderate policy.
Moderate policy in both assets and passives.
If you ask what is the best form of policy for the enterprise,
I will tell you that there is no such form that would be ideal, that you should strive for.
The form is determined by the state in which the enterprise is already.
If the enterprise has a huge amount of money, as they say, the chickens do not bite,
then for it is more convenient to use aggressive policy.
Of course, such an enterprise is able to take care of its reputation on the market.
It cannot afford any failures.
Therefore, it leads an aggressive policy.
For its reliability on the market, it has to pay more, use more funds invested in assets.
On the contrary, when the enterprise has no money at all, it has no other policy than the conservative one.
Life itself makes it work in the conditions of conservative policy.
And if the enterprise is in a normal state, in which the vast majority of enterprises are,
it leads a moderate policy.
It uses short-term money, but it does not spend it left and right.
It rationally invests it in reserves, and there is no surplus in these reserves.
This is how the vast majority of enterprises work.
If you want to work as a vast majority of enterprises, which is a normal state for a business,
then you have to choose a moderate policy of operational management of current assets and passives.
Next, we will talk about how the management of elements of current assets is going on.
One of the most important elements of current assets, as we have discussed today, is reserves.
Reserves are assets that are intended by the enterprise to function normally within its business cycle,
to ensure a normal, rhythmic state of the enterprise.
As you remember, the enterprise's production cycle consists of three parts.
The first part is the purchase of raw materials, and then there are the reserves for raw materials.
The second part is the production process, and then there is the unfinished production.
And some of the raw materials are in the form of unfinished production.
And the third part is the production process, and then there are the reserves for the finished products.
And the enterprise needs each of these forms.
It should only choose the optimal combination of these forms, and distribute its reserves among them.
And the financial stability of the enterprise depends on how it distributes these reserves.
We have already discussed that the reserves are influenced not only by the production structure,
but also by the seasonality, and the purpose of the production.
Sometimes the products need to be produced at a specific date,
and the reserves need to be prepared for this date.
We have already said that the reserves should be of the optimal size.
What if, on the contrary, the reserves are not of the optimal size?
What will the enterprise get then?
What negative aspects will be characteristic for the enterprise?
We should know what is negative, and what we should not allow the enterprise to do,
which indicates the inoptimal size of the reserves.
If the reserve size is higher than required, what does this indicate?
First of all, if the reserve size is increasing,
this should tell us about the increase in the volume of production.
The larger the volume of production, the larger the reserve size.
Of course, in order to produce more products,
we need to buy more raw materials,
we need to have more products in unfinished production,
and, accordingly, we need to have more products in unfulfilled production.
Therefore, the size of the reserves is always compared with the volume of production.
If the volume of production is increasing,
the size of the reserves does not play a negative role.
If the volume of production is increasing by 2 times,
the size of the reserves could also increase by 2 times.
This is a normal state of the enterprise.
But if the size of the reserves is increasing by 2 times,
and the volume of production is increasing by only 10%,
this is not a normal state.
We need to look closely at why this happened.
Of course, if before that there were insufficient reserves,
this may indicate the transition to the optimal regime.
But if before that we had an optimal reserve regime,
then the increase in reserves is faster than the increase in the volume of production
indicates that there is an abnormal, excessive increase in the reserves
and, accordingly, their freezing.
The increase in the number of reserves is also used by the business to protect it from inflation.
If inflation is growing at a very high rate,
then the business is protected from it.
We, as physical persons,
were protected from inflation at high rates by the fact that
we were transferring money from a weak currency to a stronger currency,
for example, dollars or euros,
and the currency that has less inflation
thus preserved its money.
Legal entities do not have the possibility to freely transfer money from one currency to another,
so they use another form of saving money in the conditions of inflation.
They increase their reserves.
The thing is that the reserves that have been acquired have not increased in price.
They have been bought, and they are available, and they can be used at any time.
At the same time, if they are not bought,
then due to inflation and the increase in prices,
after some time, the same reserves will cost more.
Therefore, in the conditions of inflation,
free money was used to buy reserves.
They are still needed, they will be used in production.
So, it is more profitable to store them in reserves than to depreciate them.
Another thing is that, again, it can be compared,
because money is not necessarily stored in the form of reserves,
it can be stored in another form, for example, in bank deposits.
It can only be compared that it is economically more profitable to invest in a bank for interest,
or to protect from inflation,
which will give more benefit,
then the mechanism is more profitable to use.
Usually, usually,
it is more profitable to protect from inflation than to use it as a deposit.
Therefore, enterprises increase the volume of reserves,
preferring to increase the investment of money in deposits.
About the ineffectiveness of the use of reserves,
it is also evidenced by freezing of reserves,
excessive freezing of reserves in the form of unfulfilled production,
or in the form of reserves in the stock of raw materials.
If there is an excessive amount of reserves,
it leads to the fact that the enterprise is not effectively using its money.
Therefore, excessive increase of reserves is harmful.
The opposite situation is when we have a shortage of reserves at the enterprise.
This is also not good.
If the enterprise is short of reserves,
then the enterprise starts to break down in production,
the rhythm of production is disrupted.
This is also bad,
because the enterprise is in a frenzy, it stops.
My favorite example is again with this car steering wheel.
There are no wheels, and the whole car was stopped.
A small detail, from which the entire conveyer of the car was stopped.
Everything is needed.
The enterprise should work rhythmically, without interruptions.
Therefore, there should be a sufficient amount of reserves.
Another thing, perhaps another,
a shortage of reserves leads to the fact that the enterprise is underloaded
and starts to produce less than it is able to produce.
The volume of production decreases,
the enterprise receives less income than it can produce.
If the enterprise does not work to its maximum,
its production cost increases.
The fact is that the enterprise has all the main means of amortization.
If the enterprise reduces the volume of production,
then the unit of production through amortization
has to produce more and more resources.
As a result, the cost of production increases.
Remember, we once said that it is much more profitable
for the enterprise to produce more pencils than one.
Because one pencil amortizes the entire enterprise.
And the cost of a pencil is so huge that it comes out as gold.
And when a lot of pencils are produced at the enterprise,
then the cost of a pencil is small.
Because all amortization is due to a huge amount of produced products.
Therefore, it is not profitable for the enterprise
to reduce the volume of produced products.
Because then the cost of production increases.
The cost of production increases.
It receives less profit than the production on the market.
All this together leads to a deterioration of the financial state of the enterprise.
And the task of every financial director
is not to allow the deterioration of the financial situation at the enterprise.
Therefore, the amount of reserves should be optimal.
And how to calculate the financial amount of reserves needed for the enterprise?
Here is the formula in front of you.
Look carefully at the screen.
And you will see how the amount of financial resources
allocated to the reserves is calculated.
You see that this amount is equal to the production
volume of the reserves per day per reserve storage standard.
This is the amount of money that should be spent on reserves
if you were not credited.
Your partners in the market did not provide you with a return,
or rather, in the term of the reserve in the form of a commodity credit.
But since we live in a real market,
where it is customary to provide reserves in installments,
we must subtract the amount of reserves needed
from the amount that the commodity credit provides us for a certain time.
Therefore, you see in this formula a minus to the creditorial debt.
The amount of financing is calculated according to each reserve,
according to each type of reserve that is required.
And it is determined what amount of funds should be invested in these reserves.
What is the optimal amount of reserves that should be invested?
This is the task of optimization.
It is very interesting, and I will gladly tell you about it.
The thing is that if we bring a huge amount of reserves,
then our transport costs become minimal.
Of course, we loaded a huge amount of transport resources
and delivered a large amount of reserves.
But the larger the amount of reserves that we bring,
the larger the warehouse that is needed for its storage.
And by saving on transport costs, we get huge costs for storage.
We need to build a huge warehouse,
we need a lot of workers who will serve it,
we need to pay additional costs for storage.
Thus, we see that huge reserves lead to an increase in costs
for storing these reserves.
But there is a reverse situation.
If we want to have minimal costs for storage,
not having a warehouse at all,
or having a small warehouse with small costs for its service,
then we should often bring our reserves and update them.
But if we bring them often,
in other words, we will update the reserves every day,
and there will be a supply every day,
then our costs for transportation will increase.
And despite the fact that the costs for storage will be small,
the costs for transportation will be large.
For an enterprise, the cost is the amount of costs
for both storage and transportation.
And the enterprise should minimize this amount.
This problem is solved mathematically,
and we get the amount of reserves
with minimal total costs.
The Wilson model is presented in the form of a formula on the slide,
which you see now.
The optimal size of the batch that needs to be brought
in order to minimize the total costs
is determined in this way.
In this formula, you see the necessary volume of goods purchased
and the ratio of goods delivered to goods stored.
The value calculated in this way
is the value of the optimal size of the batch delivered.
If an enterprise, knowing this,
purchases reserves with such volumes,
then it will incur the lowest costs
for purchasing these reserves.
Let's make an example that would consolidate
our theoretical idea about purchasing raw materials.
Let's say we have a yearly demand for raw materials
of 1 million rubles.
The current delivery costs are 12 thousand rubles,
and the current storage costs are 6 thousand rubles.
What is the optimal size of the batch delivered?
We substitute the Wilson formula,
which we have just discussed,
and we find that the optimal form for one time
is to deliver raw materials for 63 thousand rubles.
No more, no less.
Since we need a yearly demand of 1 million,
we can calculate how many times a year
we should deliver our raw materials.
1 million divided by 63 thousand
is 16 times.
That is, we should deliver raw materials 16 times a year.
No more, no less.
Because both more times and less times
lead to the fact that our costs for raw materials
will increase,
and at 16 times we will have the lowest costs.
In other words, every 22 days
we should receive a new batch of raw materials.
At the same time, the costs for maintenance will be minimal.
This is how this optimization task is solved.
And every enterprise that is engaged in the production process
is able to calculate how often and what batch of supplies
it needs to be updated
in order to have the lowest costs for supplies.
The next issue we will discuss here
is the issue of managing the debit debt.
We have learned how to manage the debit debt.
We should also learn how to manage the debit debt.
Remember, the debit debt is what is owed to your enterprise,
but not yet received.
This is the money you gave to other enterprises,
and they use this money.
But they must return it to you.
The other issue is when and on what terms.
We have already discussed that the debit debt
is a sign of the market,
of the modern market we are in.
If an enterprise does not transfer
a part of the finished product as a commodity loan
to other enterprises,
they will forget about it.
And the consumers will be transferred to competitors
who provide commodity loans.
Therefore, since we are within the market,
and it is impossible to live in a society and be free from society,
we must provide our commodity in the form of a commodity loan
just as other market participants do.
Therefore, the debit debt is a sign of the market,
a sign of the market we are in.
It exists in all enterprises
that are connected with production and trade.
Another thing is that the debit debt must be of the optimal size.
Again, the excessive size of the debit debt is bad,
just as the absence of the debit debt is also a negative point.
We must understand that when an enterprise provides a debit debt,
it distracts its own funds,
and transfers them to other enterprises,
and cannot use them in its own business.
But on the other hand, it is forced to do so,
because otherwise it will not be able to buy a commodity at all.
Several factors affect the level of the debit debt.
The first is the assessment of the buyers by their reliability.
Before providing a commodity loan to a buyer,
any enterprise assesses the reliability of the buyer as a business partner.
If the buyer is reliable and has bought your product many times,
and has paid for it in time,
then such an enterprise can be provided with a commodity loan
and receive a debit debt.
Since you are sure that you will be paid the money as agreed upon in the agreed time,
and the business process will not be disrupted.
But if you do not know this partner,
if he has appeared on the market for the first time,
and if he is not sure that he will work well on the market,
then you can refuse to provide this partner with a commodity loan.
You can say that he should first earn his reputation with his own funds,
show that he is a reliable business partner,
and then ask you for a commodity loan.
In this case, you will do absolutely right from the business point of view,
because all your competitors will do the same with this business partner.
You will not lose here.
No one will lend to a unreliable business partner.
If you remember the beginning of the 90s,
when capitalism was just born in our country,
and our enterprises bought goods abroad,
and brought them to the country to implement them here,
then all our trade organizations spoke in one voice
about the unequal attitude to us,
and to other foreign partners.
Foreign enterprises provided commodity loans to other foreign trade companies,
but not to our own.
Our enterprises were forced to buy on prepayment.
First you pay, and then you get the goods.
Why? Because we were not reliable trade partners yet.
We have just appeared on the market,
no one knew us, no one trusted us,
no one believed in us.
But the years decide.
Those enterprises that for many years
recommended themselves as reliable partners,
gradually began to receive commodity loans.
And today, Russian enterprises,
large importers,
all of them use commodity loans.
Just like we provide our customers with commodity loans.
Therefore, the customer's assessment of their reliability
is the most important point in the decision of whether to provide a commodity loan or not.